---
layout: post
title: Searching With Vim Regular Expressions
tags: Vim Regex
data: 2018-10-11
---

In this post we will look at some simple examples of using regular expressions in vim to do more
advanced searching. This based on some updates I needed to make to my reading list yaml file. We will
look at doing pattern matching with the following yaml file:

``` yaml
- author: Author1
  title: Title1

- author: Author2.
  title: Title2: a Title

- author: Author3.
  title: Title3

- author: Author4
  title: Title4: a Title

- author: Author5
  title: Title5[inside brackets]
```

We will look using regular expression pattern matching to help us with the following tasks:

1. Remove unnecessary periods from the end author lines.
2. Put titles that have a colon inside quotes.
3. Find titles that include brackets.

The search feature of Vim is capable of working with regular expressions, although with a special syntax. Below we
will look at how to search for each task.

Recall that the search feature is done by pressing `/`.

# Finding Authors with Periods

To find the authors that end in a period we match in the following order:

1. First match `author:`.
2. Next match any number of characters that aren't a newline `\n` or a period `\.`.
3. Finally match a period.

So, we search the following regular expression (the `/` is used to start the search): 
```
/author:[^\n\.]*\.
```

This pattern matches `author: Author2.` and `author: Author3.`, which is what we want.

# Finding the Titles with a Colon

This is similar to above, but now we match using colons instead of periods. So we search:

```
/title:[^\n:]*:
```

This pattern matches `title: Title2:` and `title: Title4:`.

# Finding the Title with Brackets

This search is a little tricky. It is possible to do it incorrectly and still get a postive result. A  
correct regular expression to use is
```
/title:[^\n\[]*\[
```
Notice how we used `\[` instead of `[` to search for the brackets.

Now, the incorrect expression `/title:[^\n[]*[` will still match, but it is sort of by chance that this
works. If we extend the search expression, then we get a break in the match. For example, the 
pattern 
```
/title:[^\n\[]*\[inside brackets\]
``` 
will correctly match, but the expression
```
/title:[^\n[]*[inside brackets]
``` 
will NOT match. 
